



1) I had thought that spine - leaf architecture is just basic architecture with switches connecting to each other (all leaf only connecting to spine) such that it would give us predictable number of travel for all the east west traffic from the servers to each other. I had presumed that is all and all i needed to do for the topology is to have layer 2 switches connected to each other an it should just work. but i was in for a really big and unpleasant surprise. Underneath the hood of the simple workings of the spine leaf architecture there is a complex working/methodology that keeps the architecture working/functional.
	first misconception of mine that was debunked when i dove deeper into understanding how it works with the project was that it is not a simple layer 2 switches connected with each other. I had thought that i will have the 6 switches and connect them with each other and have them in a single vlan and a single subnet which will makes things easier and should work but when i thought more about this methodology/design I found the flaw that in this condition the swtiches will keep broadcasting the frames again and again (there wont be a layer 2 loop though) which will cause slower traffic, congestion, and could lead the drop of packet. This is where i L3 switches came to rescue. The downstream traffic for the switch will only function as L2 while the up stream data will be using the L3 functionality.

	second issue that had been bugging me was how would the server communicate to internet (or host not part of spine leaf). this question had me scratch my head for days. i would create diagram to understand how could it be possible and trying to find video explanation on youtube for spin leaf I finally figured it out. P2P connection between leaf and spines (up streams) and a routing protocol (OSPF, ISIS, EIGRP or BGP; i am most comfortable with ospf). I started the project without having this figured out but when i was going through prototyping of the topology i understood that without the P2P connections (tying back to first misconception of having l2 switches connected to each other and the architecture works) is essential and a dynamic routing protocol is necessary for the spines and leafs so that they can pass on the traffic through the correct P2P link.
	During this stage I also learned about ECMP (equal cost metric pathing) which helps with load balancing. For the links between 2 device which has the same cost the device will load blanace between the links utilizing multiple links simultaneously. And I also learned about MCLAG. I still need to do more research on ECMP and MCLAG for their configuration. I have understood what they are (basic level - definition) but need more info. ECMP from internet and MCLAG from my internship

	Just learned that MCLAG does not work on routed ports so I won't be adding that on this project.

	Did research on ECMP to better understand it. Understood that there are 2 say it could load balance the traffic - Per-packet and Per-Flow. Per-packet could cause some issue with the data packets not arriving in proper order (sequence) as it sends each packet through different path and this is why Per-Flow is more preferred way. Another important thing (for me and this project) was that ospf by default enables ECMP (Thus, i do not have to write any command to enable it, I had though that i was protocol which we need to enable but rather it is a routing strategy used by different routing protocols such as BGP, OSPF, IS-IS).




After writing the playbook and running it i got several errors that i had to work through like fixing my wrx permission for ssh session on the master (personal/wsl running laptop), typo in palybook (writing cred/cred.yml instead of creds/cred.yml) which had me scratching my head for days I would get error saying "not able to create an ssh session" while the one of the task was working properly, not having pyats and genie library installed on the device before running the playbook (i am using ansible.netcommon.cli_parse module with ansible.netcommon.pyats as the parser), and  I had used network_cli for connection, importance of host_key_checking = False for lab (this allowed my playbook to run). Also similar to programming it is better to create venvs for each ansible projects as well as I was not able to install pyats and genie using pip directly to the wsl, so i had to create venv and install it in that and add path to the venv for python in ansible.cfg for the project as well which was quite intresting in my opinion as i had not expected that as previsously i would just use VS code and it would handel all the things for me but right now I am using terminator (terminal) to do all the things (limit my use of VS code so that I become comfortable with Linux and terminal again). Also had to install ansible inside the venv to run it as it was having issue with using the python library that I had downloaded, surely there is an alternative way of doing this which i would really appriciate if anyone knows could share. I am using cli_parse as i have learned it will allow me to get the information in a clearner format (json) which i could easily parse/use (as compared to just using cli_command to get the same information) later down the line in the project if needed as 
But the most important issue that I came across has to be maximum session reached as when I encountered this error I realized that if palybook with errors could cause the session to be pending in the device and could potentially lead the production environment to go down. This also made me realize how important roolback is and how important it is to only run working palybook so that the device would not malfunction due to the ansible session which got pending due to the failure of specific play of the palybook. This is why the next step would be learning more about rollback options.
Another importatnt lesson about sessions - we need to plan in such way that we are not hoping into the same device multiple time as each time we ssh into the device / play for a device; it is considered a session and if we have multiple ssh session/play it will fill out the max possible session and we will get an error.
I was getting a lot of error that said that the device did not have pyats and genie installed in it eventhough i had installed it in venv. the reason was that the path for ansible, python were not from the venv, meaning that ansible was not using the correct the application from the correct path (venv). Removed the venv and added everthying again and this time ansible was pointing to the correct place and the error was gone but i got another error. It was the ansible.utils.cli_parse module itself that was giving me problem. No matter which EOS valid command I would use it would keep on giving me error so not decided to move from that and use longer alternative method with ansible.netcommon.cli_command. Tested the basic one and it worked so now making the data more usable by piping it with json and since i am no longer using cli_parse which uses python library which i needed to download I can simply not use venv as well and remove it which i will be doing.
Ansible palybook working fine now but i did not plan the topology well and now i am hiting a major design flaw and now have to restart the topology such that it becomes a proper working network. I was so set on getting the project completed that I completely forgot the main purpose of the project which was to learn by creating a working network.

My mistake - I tought to make it easier i will have everything (the spine, leaf, and the servers) in the same netwrok but that would have not been any good as the servers could simply perfom ARP and get communicate without the need of routing protocol which beats the purpose of learning about the spine leaf topology. So for that what i did was add /30 network as the links for the spine and leafs but still kept the same overall network for the devices and now I am realizing that I can use ospf but now the network is not practical as I have same network being used in 2 different networks seperate by a /30 link. Thus rotuing is not possible as i have created an overlapping ip subnet (same subnet configured in multiple Laayer3 interfaces). 
Now that i have identified the issue I have created a new topology and will be starting over with it.


the new topology is created, devices are configured and the playbook is modified and working for the new topology. The ospf is running and I am getting all the point to point network routes but i am not getting the subnets that has been assigned for the devices. Without that the devices would not be able to communicated east west. Checking the config and trying to troubleshoot this issue.
Yes the issue was decision of using vlan10. the intension of using the vlan was only to let the device hold ip address so that the servers could have a default gateway to point to. Since both ansible and containerlab were new to me as well as the spine-leaf topology itself was new to me i did not wanted to make things a lot complicated that it has to be (that was also the reason i had thought of using a single subnet design which failed miserably). So if i had used vlan1 that would have been the default vlan all the port would have been in it and i did not have to do other additional configuration for it to be up but that is not the case for any other vlan. For other vlan to be up we need to add an interface to that vlan (an interface needs to use that vlan) so after making the 2 switchports (eth23 and 24 on leaf) which connects to the server access ports and assigning them to VLAN 10, the /29 networks were also advertised and were being listed in the route table.

finally found out why the severs/Linux would fail to add the ip address of the default gateway. It was not because of the topology or the configuration rather it was because of the nuance of Linux host image (alpine:latest). since the image uses a light-weight ip command/package the order of the command matter a lot. previously i had first assigned the ip address to the device, then set the link to up, then flush the default route (as directly adding another default route did not work since there was another already; the management from containerlab itself), and finally adding the default gateway again. But the issue was i was adding ip to an interface which was not up and since we were using light-weight version of ip command it would not automatically repopulate the local subnet when the interface was up after adding the ip address. So i fixed the order and new order was -- setting link as up, adding ip address, replacing the default route (this is more recommended way but flushing and readding the default route will work as well.)


Tested the connectivity of EAST-WEST traffic and everthing is working properly and as intended. Verified this by using traceroute. OSPF is working propelry to advertise all the networks, packets only take 4 hops to reach from one server to another sever which is in a different subnet/network (verfied using traceroute), and traceroute verified that the packet is taking an intended path (server - leaf - spine - leaf - server), and traceruote also showed me how ECMP is working. ECMP was/and still is a new concept for me and seeing observing that in 2nd hop and 3rd showing that the traffic is using multiple path simulatneously to reach the destination which why ECMP is used. Verified everything and it looks good. Also verified that trhough show ip route [network_address/X] which showed 2 paths to that network.

Project completed.
	
	